---
title: "XPath, the Expression Language"
---

XPath is usually associated with XML files because it was originally designed for XML and its many derivatives, such as HTML and XHTML.

XPath is an expression language that defines how to access an element in your file.

### Quick example:

1. Consider the following structured XML code:

```xml
<root>
    <child1 />
    <child2 />
</root>
```

2. To access `child1` and `child2`, you would use:
  - `/root/child1`
  - `/root/child2`

The structure is straightforward:
- `/root` represents the `<root>` tag.
- `/child1` represents the `<child1>` tag.
- `/root/child1` represents the `<child1>` tag as a child of the `<root>` tag.

XML XPath is a powerful language capable of describing **any** element route in your codebase.

### CSS Selectors

As you probably know, CSS is composed of **selectors** and **properties**:

```css
tag.class#id {
   color: brown;
}
```

An equivalent XPath expression could be `//tag[@class='class' and @id='id']`. It may look longer, but it's still manageable.

CSS, as a separate language, has its own expression path system for evaluating elements in a document. This is known as the **CSS Selector**.

The reason for its existence isn’t as important as recognizing that it effectively separates languages and technologies. Over time, CSS has gained prefixes, variables, references, functions, inheritance, and more. XPath-like capabilities in CSS selectors have helped to achieve this functionality.

### JSON Path

Consider the following JSON data:

```json
{
   "store": {
      "book": [
         {
            "author": "Nigel Rees",
            "title": "Sayings of the Century",
            "price": 8.95
         },
         {
            "author": "J. R. R. Tolkien",
            "title": "The Lord of the Rings",
            "isbn": "0-395-19395-8",
            "price": 22.99
         }
      ]
   }
}
```

To access the first book, **"Sayings of the Century"**, we use:

```json
$.store.book[0]
```

This expression retrieves the entire object:

```json
{
   "author": "Nigel Rees",
   "title": "Sayings of the Century",
   "price": 8.95
}
```

It resembles an XML XPath query like `//store/book[0]`.

### SQL

XPath-like structures are not exclusive to XML and CSS. SQL also has its own way of expressing paths:

```sql
SELECT table1.column1, table2.column1
FROM schema1.table1, schema2.table2
WHERE table1.column1 = 'value';
```

Here, `schema.table` and `table.column` define paths to data. A similar XPath-like structure for SQL could be:

```xpath
//schema/table/column
```

### More XPath

Look at your browser's URL. It's a structured path!

```
{% capture page_link %}{% post_url 2025-03-14-xpath %}{% endcapture %}{{ page_link | absolute_url }}
```

Even domain zones represent a hierarchical namespace of possible domains worldwide. Originally, they corresponded to country regions.

Similarly, an IP address describes a location in the network.

Have you ever dialed a phone number? Your **cellular XPath** consists of:
- A `+` followed by the country code.
- A regional number.
- A client number.

Even in a Unix terminal, when you type `pwd`, the output looks like an XPath:

```
/Users/xepozz
```

XPath-like structures are everywhere!

### PHP XPath?

What about PHP? Like Java, Python, or JavaScript, PHP has its own package addressing system:
- `App\Controller` in PHP.
- `app.controller` in Java or Python.
- `app/controller` in JavaScript.

> I won’t go into the differences between namespaces and packages here, as they are irrelevant to XPath.

When copying the full path of an entity in an IDE, you might see:
- Functions: `App\Functions\function1`
- Classes: `App\Controller\UserController`
- Methods: `App\Controller\UserController::actionIndex`
- Properties: `App\Controller\UserController::$property`
- Constants: `App\Controller\UserController::CONSTANT`

These follow a recognizable pattern:

```
{namespace}\{entity name}::{inner entity name}
```

Here, `{inner entity name}` refers to:
- `$name` for properties.
- `name` for methods and constants.

PHP has no official **standardized XPath**, but various approaches exist. Any way you reference an entity is essentially a **custom** path.

### MetaStorm

MetaStorm introduces its own **PHP XPath**. This was necessary because frameworks often reference some magical points, e.g.:
- `All properties` of a `class` are determined by the `$model` property type in `$currentFile`.
- `All methods` of a `class` are inferred from the `return type` of `getModelClass()`.
- etc.

For named entities, like namespaces, functions, classes, and variables, the path follows the **Fully Qualified Name (FQN)**.

However, anonymous or unnamed entities do not fit within this system. 

By anonymous entities I mean:

```php
['class' => '\Namespace\MyClass', 'property' => '1']
```
in context of a method call, such as `'\Namespace\MyClass'` in the following:
```php
$object->method('\Namespace\MyClass');
```

Currently, MetaStorm is able to jump between code entities using current [code Xpath rules]({{ 'other#xpath-for-methods-properties-arrayvalues' | relative_url }}):

- XPath must be a **FQCN** or started with a relative point:
   - `$containingClass` – means the class in which context the target is placed
   - `$argument` – related to the positioned argument: it's `$obj` in `$service->method($obj, $prop)`
   - `$variable` – related to the variable holding the method: it's `$service` in `$service->method()`
- After you specified starting point you may walk further:
   - Each "entrance" must be a dot symbol: `.`
   - Each "property" must be prefixed with a dollar symbol: `$`
   - Each "method return type" must have double squares as a suffix : `()`
- Lookup supports:
   - Typed properties: `private Class $property`
   - Untyped properties with reference inside: `private string $propertyClass = Class::class`
   - Typed methods' returning: `public function methodA(): Class`

As long as jumping between the files using current [file Xpath rules]({{ 'other#xpath-for-files' | relative_url }})
- XPath must be started from a relative point:
  - `$project` – project base path
  - `$file` – related to the current file
  - `$directory` – related to the current directory

### PHP Schema

The example I've described with array-like configuration:

```php
[
  'class' => '\Namespace\MyClass', 
  'property' => '1',
]
```

is well described by PHP Schema. Unfortunately, PHP does not have a standardized way to define and validate such array structures.

I have initiated internal discussions about this idea. 
It will be a long journey, but if you are interested in contributing, let me know.

A draft will be available soon: [https://github.com/php-schema/php-schema](https://github.com/php-schema/php-schema)

### PHP Xpath

As [PHP Schema](#php-schema) evolves, an advanced method for accessing code entities is PHP XPath.

PHP XPath can help describe possible values in PHP Schema, reference dependent code entities, and navigate schema nodes for tooling purposes.

Initially, it was developed to simplify writing MetaStorm configurations, but it has since grown into a standalone, complex project.

I hope this effort will succeed, providing the PHP community with powerful tools similar to those available for XML, JSON, YAML, and many other languages.